FreeBSD’s previous malloc(3) implementation by Kamp (1998), commonly referred to as phkmalloc,
has long been considered one of the best available, and has fared well in published comparisons (Feng
and Berger, 2005; Berger et al., 2000; Bohra and Gabber, 2001). However, it was designed at a time
when multi-processor systems were rare, and support for multi-threading was spotty. The FreeBSD
project is engaged in an ongoing effort to provide scalable performance on SMP systems, and has
made sufficient progress that malloc(3) had become a scalability bottleneck for some multi-threaded
applications. This paper presents a new malloc(3) implementation, informally referred to here as
jemalloc.
On the surface, memory allocation and deallocation appears to be a simple problem that merely requires a
bit of bookkeeping in order to keep track of in-use versus available memory. However, decades
of research and scores of allocator implementations have failed to produce a clearly superior allocator.
In fact, the best known practices for measuring allocator performance are remarkably simplistic, as are
the summary statistics for measured performance. Wilson et al. (1995) provide an excellent review of
the state of the art as of a decade ago. Multi-processors were not a significant issue then, but otherwise
the review provides a thorough summary of the issues that face modern allocators. Following are brief
mentions of various issues that particularly impact jemalloc, but no attempt is made to discuss all of
the issues that must be considered when designing an allocator.
Allocator performance is typically measured via some combination of application execution time and
average or peak application memory usage. It is not sufficient to measure the time consumed by the
allocator code in isolation. Memory layout can have a significant impact on how quickly the rest of the
application runs, due to the effects of CPU cache, RAM, and virtual memory paging. It is now commonly
accepted that synthetic traces are not even adequate for measuring the effects of allocation policy on
fragmentation (Wilson et al., 1995). The only definitive measures of allocator performance are attained
by measuring the execution time and memory usage of real applications. This poses challenges when
qualifying the performance characteristics of allocators. Consider that an allocator might perform very
poorly for certain allocation patterns, but if none of the benchmarked applications manifest any such
patterns, then the allocator may appear to perform well, despite pathological performance for some
work loads. This makes testing with a wide variety of applications important. It also motivates an
approach to allocator design that minimizes the number and severity of degenerate edge cases.
Fragmentation can be thought of in terms of internal fragmentation and external fragment